# Steering Committee Meeting October 2021

Attendance: Alex Chernoguzov, Alex Mccaskey, Andrei Petrenko, Bettina Heim,
Fabrice Franchon, Kalan Snyder, Thien Nguyen, Tom Lubinski, Pauline Jordan
(Guest), Seth Newberry (Guest), Scott Nicholas (Guest)

## Meeting agenda

- Recap of previous decisions
- QIR logo options
- GitHub organization and repository names
- Date of press release to announce formation of QIR Alliance
- Nominate and vote for Chair position
- Steering Committee meetings
  - Cadence
  - Open or Close to non-steering committee members?
- Next steps

## Recap of previous decisions

- Use MIT as the license for code repos
- Quantum Intermediate Representation Alliance as the name of the new entity
- Project Charter and Working Group Scope

## Key decisions (all voted unanimously)

- Logo:
  - We are choosing Option A (as referred in attached presentation).
  - Pauline will investigate some variants to possibly make the “I” more
    obvious but we did not seem to consider this as blocking. Fabrice to share
    back the additional options.
- GitHub
  - Steering Committee will appoint maintainers of code who will have
    flexibility to maintain while the steering committee observes
  - Steering Committee members have admin rights.
  - There will be one repo per spec, and profiles will be sub-folders
    - https://github.com/qir-alliance for the organization
    - https://github.com/qir-alliance/qir-spec for the QIR specification
- Specification
  - We will check-in the current version of the specification
  - Additional changes such as callable values support and adding C APIs will
    be added as part of the normal contribution process
- Announcements and Press Releases
  - Linux Foundation will announce to its members (Project notice) the
    formation of the Alliance within the next 2 business days
  - A formal press release will be published in November based on inputs from
    all members.
- Chair
  - Steering Committee unanimously elected Bettina Heim as Chair of the QIR
    Alliance Steering Committee
- Steering Committee meetings
  - Monthly formal cadence augmented by ad-hoc meetings and discussions
  - Teams will be the main meeting and communication mechanism among steering
    committee members
  - Keep Steering Committee meetings closed until the most public announcement
    of the creation of QIR Alliance (right before Q2B). We will likely open-up
    after that, while making sure there is a proper organization to receive
    input from non-steering committee members.

## Follow-ups / Action items

- Fabrice to identify if https://github.com/qira can be obtained from their
  current owners.
- Fabrice to facilitate the formal press release leveraging the template
  provided by Linux Foundation.
- Fabrice to facilitate setting-up the monthly meeting cadence
- Fabrice to facilitate setting-up a Teams site
- In a next meeting we will discuss code repos.

## Additional notes

- GitHub
  - Linux Foundation needs to be an owner (but not an administrator)
