# Hardware adoption committee 2023-09-08

## Attendance

- Jean Senellart (Quandela)
- Sonia Pignorel (Microsoft)
- Andrei Petrenko (QCI)
- Tom Lubinski (QCI)
- Stefan Wernli (Microsoft)
- Amos Anderson (QCI)
- Bettina Heim (Nvidia)
- Bill Ticehurst (Microsoft)
- Laurent Prost (Alice & Bob)
- Julien Dumazert (Alice & Bob)

## Meeting agenda

- Presentations by companies
- Discussion of companies needs and next steps

## Notes

- See presentations folder fo slide decks
- Topics discussed:
  - How to handle the different gate sets allowed by the providers?
    - Possible solution #1: Shift responsiblity to transpile to hardware native
      gate set from frontend compiler / high-level framework to hardware
      provider
    - Possible solution #2: Standardization of known gates so that frontend
      compilers know most of the gates used by most hardwares
  - QIR computational model based on sequences of discrete gates doesn't
    support all styles of hardware control (ex: pulse-based control of
    superconducting circuits). Should QIR be extended? Or should it stick to
    gate-based control?
  - Should QIR include high-level algorithms like QAOA? Ex: the frontend
    compiler / high-level framework asks for QAOA and the responsibility to
    implement QAOA is with the hardware provider. "Users care about
    applications, nobody wants to run a CNOT."
  - How to increase adoption of QIR by the quantum community and in particular
    hardware providers?
    - Possible solution #1: increase interoperability of QIR by improving
      translations from/to Qiskit and QASM (major frameworks). In practice,
      this means improving qiskit-qir and qcor.
    - Possible solution #2: focus a sub-community like hybrid computing, which
      QIR seems to be well-suited for
  - Do end users want low-level control?
    - Interest for low-level control is in academic groups, but it is risky
      for hardware providers to cater to that crowd before they have secured
      public grants to fund developments

## Next steps

- Organize another meeting of 1.5 hours in 3 months
  - Topic: balance between standardization and specialization of QIR
- Upload hardware providers presentation to GitHub folder
- Find a way to create a discussion group to facilitate discussions (e.g.,
- mailing list, Slack channel, etc)
